Asia is facing a major squeeze or its
staple food the price of rice is worth
markets has jumped fifty percent to over
the past two months it has at least
doubled since 2004 with more steep
prices predicted many asian nations are
now banning or restricting rice exports
to control prices at home in the first
part of our special series on rice the
BBC Florence on reports from the
Philippines I'm at the International
Rice Research Institute just south of
Manila back in the 60s I anticipation
could be sure of enough to eat thanks to
modernize rice farming techniques but
today 40 years on experts here a very
concern I'm joined now by dr. Robert
Ziggler a director general at Erie dr.
Ziegler what is going on right now is
Asia facing a right crisis well I'm not
certain that crisis is exactly the right
term but we are certainly facing
shortages there's a tightening of
supplies what's happening is that we're
having a convergence of events such as
population growth rapid economic growth
in China and India for example decrease
in available land as it's being
converted to urban urban areas decrease
in water as it's being diverted for use
in industrial activities these are
coming together to tighten rice supply
and one solution to easing shortages
many say is genetically modified crops
which Erie is doing some research on
here as well but what do you have to say
to religious groups or nonprofit
organizations who are so strongly
against a GM crops well I'm not aware of
major religious objections to GM crops
we believe that the tools of
biotechnology have a lot to offer
including GMO crops they should be
assessed in a way that that all sectors
of society can feel comfortable with
and here in the Philippines the country
used to be self-sufficient and rise and
now it seems to be struggling to secure
enough supplies to meet domestic demand
what would you advise before the
government the Philippine farmer is
quite productive yields are much higher
than those of a Thai farmer the having
said that the government does need to
reinvest in research research and
development and in fact I believe that
research and development is going to be
the key to providing long-term food
security for the region what is legal
the Green Revolution was a miracle don't
we need another one right now what needs
to be done there's no question we need
another green revolution we need to re
restart our investments in research and
development these have lagged for the
last 15 years I think we're paying the
price for that neglect we need to make
sure our irrigation schemes are in place
and we need to make sure that there are
means to get the best technologies to
the farmer's field we need to look at
the traditional extension systems and I
think we need to look again at how we
can have productive pro-poor private and
public sector partnerships dr. Ziegler
thank you very much dr. Robert Ziggler
director-general at Erie and tomorrow
I'll look at how all this is going to
impact the people here in the
philippines meanwhile the rice crisis is
threatening even China's special
administrative regions China's premier
wen jiabao has promised to ensure rice
applies to Hong Kong and Macau following
panic buying triggered by soaring prices
China the world's top producer and
consumer price has stopped grain exports
to ensure the method supplies but it's
making exceptions for Hong Kong Macau
and even Taiwan